ECS chapter for new book (#182)
bevyengine/bevy-website: content/learn/book/ecs/exclusive-world-access/_index.md

```rust

```

## Custom commands

Commands execute arbitrary logic at the end of the stage, queued up by ordinary systems.
You can extend the [`Command`](https://docs.rs/bevy/0.5.0/bevy/ecs/system/trait.Command.html) trait to create your own commands, performing tasks with far-reaching consequences without requiring access to that data in your originating systems.

Here's an example of how you might do so:

TODO: add custom commands example
```rust

```

Due to the delayed effect of commands, and their relatively poor performance (they can only be executed one at a time in sequence), you should only use custom commands for tasks that truly need their world-altering powers.
In many cases, an event plus an event-handling system will be faster, more ergonomic and easier to debug.

## `NonSend` resources

Non-send resources are resources that lack the `Send + Sync` trait bounds: they cannot be sent safely across threads.
`NonSend` resources will typically be quite advanced: used for things like networking or interfacing with external libraries.
They are accessed using `NonSend<R>` and `NonSendMut<R>` in a way that is directly analogous to `Res` and `ResMut`.

> The only difference is that they can only be accessed when we have exclusive `World` access, as accessing them can only be done on the main thread.

Reviewer: For a concrete case, you can look at cart/bevy#10 and cart/bevy#11.
`#10` solved the Problem by making the system exclusive, but was replaced by `#11` which doesn't require the exclusive access to the world.

TODO: explain how `cell` and `resource_scope` works.
TODO: add `WorldCell` example

### Accessing system parameters with `World` access

Occasionally, you may find yourself reaching for convenient system parameters (like `EventReader` and `EventWriter`) while you have exclusive world access.
We can call these directly, using the same syntax as we use in systems, using the [`SystemState`](https://docs.rs/bevy/latest/bevy/ecs/system/struct.SystemState) type.

```rust
use bevy::prelude::*;
use bevy::ecs::SystemState;
use bevy::app::AppExit;

let mut world = World::new();

// Extract all of the relevant parameters from the world, as if it were a system
let mut system_state: SystemState<(Query<&Transform, With<Camera>>, Commands, EventWriter<AppExit>>)> =
            SystemState::new(&mut world);

// Use .get() if you only need read-access for less restrictive ownership constraints
let (camera_transform_query, mut commands, mut app_exit_event_writer) = system_state.get_mut(&world);

// You can then work with the extracted system parameters however you wish
app_exit_event_writer.send(AppExit);
```

> ### Manually running systems

Author: If https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/2427 lands in time for 0.6, we should use that here instead.

It also yeets .system for the methods in question!

+++
title = "Exclusive `World` access"
weight = 7
template = "book-section.html"
page_template = "book-section.html"
+++

In various places, Bevy code works directly with the `World` data, gaining exclusive, blocking access to it and allowing for arbitrary mutations.
This is very flexible, and can be essential for advanced use cases, but prevents any other systems from running simultaneously and can often be harder to reason about and maintain.
As a result, you should use only exclusive `World` when you have to.
You might be working with the `World` if:

- you're running an exclusive system to access data in unusually broad ways (such as for saving the game or handling networking)
- you're writing a custom command, to execute logic at the end of the system
- you're initializing a resource using the `FromWorld` trait

> - you're working with a `NonSend` resource that cannot be sent across threads

Reviewer: Perhaps call this `NonSend` Values, to avoid confusion with regular systems that use `NonSend`Resources and are not exclusive.
```suggestion
- you're working with `NonSend` values that cannot be sent across threads
```

Author: They're resources in every other respect, and are stored with other resources.

That said, I like this change as there's no blockers to us implementing NonSend components too.

You can create new queries using [`query`](https://docs.rs/bevy/latest/bevy/ecs/world/struct.World.html#method.query) and [`query_filtered`](https://docs.rs/bevy/latest/bevy/ecs/world/struct.World.html#method.query_filtered), using the former when you only have one type parameter and the latter when you want to use the second filtering type parameter of standard queries as well.

### Accessing multiple parts of the `World` simultaneously

When working with non-trivial exclusive `World` logic, you're likely to run into cases where you need mutable access to more than one part of the `World` at once.
This tends to make the compiler quite unhappy, but by carefully partitioning our data access we can ensure that our code doesn't violate Rust's memory safety rules.
No `unsafe` needed!

Right now, there are two main tools to do so:

> 1. [`World::cell`](https://docs.rs/bevy/latest/bevy/ecs/world/struct.World.html#method.cell): Like the [concept of the same name from the Rust standard library](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/cell/), this enables interior mutability by disabling Rust's compile-time checks for aliased mutability and replacing them run-time checks.

Author: I am not at all confident in this explanation; someone please chime in if you understand / can explain the mechanics better.

- you're initializing a resource using the {{rust_type(type="struct" crate="bevy" mod = "ecs/world" name="FromWorld" no_mod = "true")}} trait
- you're working with {{rust_type(type="struct" crate="bevy" mod = "ecs/world" name="NonSend" no_mod = "true")}} values that cannot be sent across threads
- you're setting up tests to be run in a headless fashion
- you're using {{rust_mod(crate="bevy" mod="ecs")}} as a standalone crate

## Basic usage

Generally speaking, the API of working directly with the {{rust_type(type="struct" crate="bevy_ecs" name="World")}} mirrors those elsewhere that you might be familiar with.

Like with {{rust_type(type="struct" crate="bevy" mod = "ecs/system" name="Commands" no_mod = "true")}}, you can call {rust_type(type="struct" crate="bevy_ecs" name="World" method = "spawn")}}, {rust_type(type="struct" crate="bevy_ecs" name="World" method = "spawn_batch")}} and {rust_type(type="struct" crate="bevy_ecs" name="World" method = "despawn")}} to add and remove entities, adding components to them with {{rust_type(type="struct" crate="bevy_ecs" name="World" method = "insert")}} and {{rust_type(type="struct" crate="bevy_ecs" name="World" method = "insert_bundle")}}.

> Resources are simply accessed with {rust_type(type="struct" crate="bevy_ecs" name="World" method = "get_resource")}} and the mutable equivalent {rust_type(type="struct" crate="bevy_ecs" name="World" method = "get_resource_mut")}}.

Reviewer 2: Two cases here.

Like with queries, you can call {rust_type(type="struct" crate="bevy_ecs" name="World" method = "get")}} and {rust_type(type="struct" crate="bevy_ecs" name="World" method = "get_mut")}} to access component data of a particular sort on a given entity.

> If you want access to *all* of the data on an entity, use {rust_type(type="struct" crate="bevy_ecs" name="World" method = "get_entity")}} and {rust_type(type="struct" crate="bevy_ecs" name="World" method = "get_entity_mut")}}, along with various {rust_type(type="struct" crate="bevy_ecs" name="World" method = "EntityRef)}} methods to operate on the returned object.

Reviewer 2: three here.

> You can create new queries using {rust_type(type="struct" crate="bevy_ecs" name="World" method = "query")}} and {rust_type(type="struct" crate="bevy_ecs" name="World" method = "query_filtered")}}.

Reviewer 2: two here.
